::	

ISBN 978-0-87779-795-1::
::	to banana, humdrum, immediately further, mat, day, bother, car, now, baby, chin, did, bet, bare, easy, fifty, go, hat, tip, near, site, job, kin, lily, murmur, no, sing bone, saw, coin, boar, pepper, red, source, as tie, as th rule, pull, boor, vivid, we, yard, zone, as slash mark mark mark

BENE AM BELL PAC CRIM PROB GRAV LEV Words from Mythology and History::
::	

BENE is Latin for “well.” A benefit is a good result or effect. Something beneficial produces good results or effects. The Latin root can be heard in other languages as well: “Good!” or “Fine!” in Spanish is “Bueno!”; in French, it's “Bon!”; and in Italian, just say “Bene!”::
::	benediction benefactor beneficiary benevolence

AM comes from the Latin amare, “to love.” The Roman god of love was known by two different names, Cupid and Amor. Amiable means “friendly or good-natured,” and amigo is Spanish for “friend.”::
::	amicable enamored amorous paramour

BELL comes from the Latin word meaning “war.” Bellona was the little-known Roman goddess of war; her husband, Mars, was the god of war.::
::	antebellum bellicose belligerence rebellion

PAC is related to the Latin words for “agree” and “peace.” The Pacific Ocean—that is, the “Peaceful Ocean”—was named by Ferdinand Magellan because it seemed so calm after he had sailed through the storms near Cape Horn. (Magellan obviously had never witnessed a Pacific typhoon.)::
::	pacify pacifist pact pace

CRIM comes from the Latin words for “fault or crime” or “accusation.” It's obvious where the root shows up most commonly in English. A crime is an act forbidden by the government, which the government itself will punish you for, and for which you may be branded a criminal. A crime is usually more serious than a tort (see TORT), a “civil wrong” for which the wronged person must himself sue if he wants to get repaid in some way.::
::	criminology decriminalize incriminate recrimination

PROB comes from the Latin words for “prove or proof” and “honesty or integrity.” A probe, whether it's a little object for testing electrical circuits or a spacecraft headed for Mars, is basically something that's looking for evidence or proof. And probable originally described something that wasn't certain but might be “provable.”::
::	approbation probate probity reprobate

GRAV comes from the Latin word meaning “heavy, weighty, serious.” Gravity is, of course, what makes things heavy, and without it there wouldn't be any life on earth, since nothing would stay on earth at all. This doesn't stop us from yelling in outrage when the familiar laws of gravity cause something to drop to the floor and break.::
::	grave gravitas gravitate aggravate

LEV comes from the Latin adjective levis, meaning “light,” and the verb levare, meaning “to raise or lighten.” So a lever is a bar used to lift something, by means of leverage. And levitation is the magician's trick in which a body seems to rise into the air by itself.::
::	alleviate elevation cantilever levity cicerone hector hedonism nestor spartan stentorian stoic sybaritic

MANIA PSYCH CEPT FIN JECT TRACT DUC/DUCT SEQU Words from Mythology::
::	

MANIA in Latin means “madness,” and the meaning passed over into English unchanged. Our word mania can mean a mental illness, or at least an excessive enthusiasm. We might call someone a maniac who was wild, violent, and mentally ill—or maybe just really enthusiastic about something. Too much caffeine might make you a bit manic. But the intense mood swings once known as manic-depressive illness are now usually called bipolar disorder instead.::
::	kleptomania dipsomaniac megalomaniac egomaniac

PSYCH comes from the Greek word psyche, meaning “breath, life, soul.” Psychology is the science of mind and behavior, and a psychologist treats or studies the mental problems of individuals and groups. Psychiatry is a branch of medicine that deals with mental and emotional disorders, and a psychiatrist (like any other doctor) may prescribe drugs to treat them.::
::	psyche psychedelic psychosomatic psychotherapist

CEPT comes from the Latin verb meaning “take, seize.” Capture, which is what a captor has done to a captive, has the same meaning. Captivate once meant literally “capture,” but now means only to capture mentally through charm or appeal. But in some other English words this root produces, such as those below, its meaning is harder to find.::
::	reception intercept perceptible susceptible

FIN comes from the Latin word for “end” or “boundary.” Final describes last things, and a finale or a finish is an ending. (And at the end of a French film, you may just see the word “Fin.”) But its meaning is harder to trace in some of the other English words derived from it.::
::	confine definitive finite infinitesimal

JECT comes from jacere, the Latin verb meaning “throw” or “hurl.” To reject something is to throw (or push) it back; to eject something is to throw (or drive) it out; and to inject something is to throw (or squirt) it into something else.::
::	interject conjecture projection trajectory

TRACT comes from trahere, the Latin verb meaning “drag or draw.” Something attractive draws us toward it. Something distracting pulls your attention away. And when you extract something from behind the sofa, you drag it out.::
::	traction retract protracted intractable

DUC/DUCT, from the Latin verb ducere, “to lead,” shows up regularly in English. Duke means basically “leader.” The Italian dictator Mussolini was known simply as Il Duce, “the leader.” But such words as produce and reduce also contain the root, even though their meanings show it less clearly.::
::	conducive deduction induce seduction

SEQU comes from the Latin verb sequi, meaning “to follow.” A sequel follows the original novel, film, or television show.::
::	sequential subsequent consequential non bacchanalian delphic jovial mercurial venereal

AMBI EPI HYP/HYPO THERM/THERMO POLY PRIM HOM/HOMO DIS Latin Borrowings::
::	

AMBI means “on both sides” or “around”; ambi- comes from Latin. Most of us are either right-handed or left-handed, but ambidextrous people can use their right and left hand equally well.::
::	ambiguous ambient ambivalent ambit

EPI is a Greek prefix that may mean various things, but usually “on, over” or “attached to.” So an earthquake's epicenter is the ground right over the center of the quake. And your epidermis is the outer layer of your skin, on top of the inner dermis.::
::	epilogue epiphyte epitaph epithet one growing

HYP/HYPO is a Greek prefix meaning “below, under.” Many hypo- words are medical. A hypodermic needle injects medication under the skin. Hypotension, or low blood pressure, can be just as unhealthy as the better-known hypertension, or high blood pressure.::
::	hypochondriac hypoglycemia hypothermia hypothetical

THERM/THERMO comes from the Greek word meaning “warm.” A thermometer measures the amount of warmth in a body, the air, or an oven. A thermostat makes sure the temperature stays at the same level. And it's easy to see why the German manufacturers of a vacuum-insulated bottle back in 1904 gave it the name Thermos.::
::	thermal thermodynamics thermonuclear

POLY comes from polys, the Greek word for “many.” A polytechnic institute offers instruction in many technical fields. Polygamy is marriage in which one has many spouses, or at least more than the legal limit of one. And polysyllabic words are words of many syllables—of which there are quite a few in this book.::
::	polyp polyglot polymer polygraph

PRIM comes from primus, the Latin word for “first.” Something primary is first in time, rank, or importance. Something primitive is in its first stage of development. And something primeval had its origin in the first period of world or human history.::
::	primal primer primate primordial

HOM/HOMO comes from homos, the Greek word for “same,” which in English words may also mean “similar.” A homograph is a word spelled like another word but different in meaning or pronunciation, and a homosexual is a person who favors others of the same sex. (This root has nothing to do with the Latin homo, meaning “person,” as in Homo sapiens, the French homme, and the Spanish hombre.)::
::	homonym homogeneous homologous homogenize

DIS comes from Latin, where it means “apart.” In English, its meanings have increased to include “opposite” or “not” (as in distaste, disagreeable), “deprive of” (disinfect), or “exclude or expel from” (disbar). The original meaning can still be seen in a word like dissipate, which means “to break up and scatter.”::
::	dissuade disorient discredit dislodge ad ad alter de quid ex modus modus

VOR CARN CRED FID CURR/CURS PED FLECT POST Words from Mythology::
::	

VOR comes from the Latin verb vorare, “to eat,” and the ending -ivorous shows up in words that refer to eaters of certain kinds of food. Frugivorous (for “fruit-eating”), granivorous (for “grain-eating”), and graminivorous (for “grass-eating”) aren't too rare, but you won't run across phytosuccivorous (“plant-sap-eating”) every day.::
::	carnivorous herbivorous insectivorous voracious

CARN comes from a Latin word meaning “flesh” or “meat.” Carnation originally meant “the color of flesh,” which was once the only color of the flower we call the carnation. In Christian countries, Lent is the period when the faithful traditionally give up something they love, often meat. The days leading up to Lent are known as the carnival season, from the Italian carnelevare, later shortened to carnevale, which meant “removal of meat”—though during carnival, of course, people indulge in just about everything, and the removal of meat only comes later.::
::	carnage carnal incarnate reincarnation

CRED comes from credere, the Latin verb meaning “to believe” or “to entrust.” We have a good credit rating when institutions trust in our ability to repay a loan, and we carry credentials so that others will believe that we are who we say we are.::
::	credence credible credulity credo

FID comes from fides, the Latin word for “faith” or “trust.” Fidelity is another word for “faithfulness.” Confidence is having faith in someone or something. An infidel is someone who lacks a particular kind of religious faith. And the once-popular dog's name Fido is Latin for “I trust.”::
::	affidavit diffident fiduciary perfidy

CURR/CURS comes from currere, the Latin verb meaning “to run.” Although words based on this root don't tend to suggest speed, the sense of movement remains. Current, for instance, refers to running water in a stream or river, or electrons running through a wire, and an excursion is a trip from one place to another.::
::	concurrent cursory discursive precursor

PED comes from the Latin word for “foot.” A pedal is pushed by the foot; a pedicure is a treatment of the feet, toes, and toenails; and a pedestal is what a statue stands on—in a sense, its foot.::
::	quadruped pedigree impediment pedestrian

FLECT comes from flectere, the Latin verb meaning “to bend.” The root sometimes takes the form flex-. Things that are flexible can be bent, and when you flex a muscle, you're usually bending a limb—which, as a trainer at the gym will tell you, requires the use of flexor muscles.::
::	deflect reflective genuflect inflection

POST comes from a Latin word meaning “after” or “behind.” A postscript (or PS) is a note that comes after an otherwise completed letter, usually as an afterthought. Postpartum refers to the period following childbirth, with any related events and complications. To postdate a check is to give it a date after the day it was written.::
::	posterior posthumous postmodern postmortem calypso odyssey palladium procrustean protean sibyl siren

MAL CATA PROT/PROTO ANTE ORTHO RECT EU DYS Latin Borrowings::
::	

MAL comes from a Latin word meaning “bad.” A malady is a bad condition—a disease or illness—of the body or mind. Malpractice is bad medical practice. Malodorous things smell bad. And a malefactor is someone guilty of bad deeds.::
::	malevolent malicious malign malnourished

CATA comes from the Greek kata, one of whose meanings was “down.” A catalogue is a list of items put down on paper, and a catapult is a weapon for hurling missiles down on one's enemies.::
::	cataclysm catacomb catalyst catatonic

PROT/PROTO comes from Greek and has the basic meaning “first in time” or “first formed.” Protozoa are one-celled animals, such as amoebas and paramecia, that are among the most basic members of the biological kingdom. A proton is an elementary particle that, along with neutrons, can be found in all atomic nuclei. A protoplanet is a whirling mass of gas and dust that astronomers believe may someday become a planet.::
::	protagonist protocol protoplasm prototype

ANTE is Latin for “before” or “in front of.” Antediluvian, which describes something very old or outdated, literally means “before the flood”—that is, Noah's Flood. And antebellum literally means “before the war,” usually the American Civil War.::
::	antechamber antedate antecedent anterior

ORTHO comes from orthos, the Greek word for “straight,” “right,” or “true.” Orthotics is a branch of therapy that straightens out your stance or posture by providing artificial support for weak joints or muscles. And orthograde animals, such as human beings, walk with their bodies in a “straight” or vertical position.::
::	orthodontics orthodox orthopedics orthography

RECT comes from the Latin word rectus, which means “straight” or “right.” To correct something is to make it right. A rectangle is a four-sided figure with straight parallel sides. Rectus, short for Latin rectus musculus, may refer to any of several straight muscles, such as those of the abdomen.::
::	rectitude rectify rectilinear directive

EU comes from the Greek word for “well”; in English words it can also mean “good” or “true.” A veterinarian who performs euthanasia is providing a very sick or hopelessly injured animal a “good” or easy death.::
::	eugenic euphemism euphoria eulogy

DYS comes from Greek, where it means “bad” or “difficult.” So dysphagia is difficult swallowing, and dyspnea is difficult or labored breathing. Dysphasia is an inability to use and understand language because of injury to or disease of the brain. Dys- is sometimes close in meaning to dis- (see DIS), but try not to confuse the two.::
::	dystopia dyslexia dyspeptic dysplasia bona carpe caveat corpus curriculum

EQU QUIS PLE/PLEN METR/METER AUD SON ERR CED Words from Mythology and History::
::	

EQU comes from the Latin word aequus, meaning “equal.” To equalize means to make things equal. Things that are equivalent have the same value, use, or meaning. All three sides of an equilateral triangle are of the same length. And an equation (for instance, 21 + 47 = 68) is a statement that two mathematical expressions are equal.::
::	equable adequacy equilibrium equinox

QUIS is derived from the Latin verb meaning “to seek or obtain.” The roots quer, quir, and ques are derived from the same Latin verb and give us words such as inquiry and question.::
::	inquisition perquisite acquisitive requisition

PLE/PLEN comes from a Latin word meaning “to fill.” It can be seen in the words plenty, meaning basically “filled,” and complete, meaning “thoroughly filled.”::
::	plenary complement deplete replete

METR/METER comes to us from Greek by way of Latin; in both languages it refers to “measure.” A thermometer measures heat; a perimeter is the measure around something; and things that are isometric are equal in measure.::
::	metric meter odometer tachometer

AUD, from the Latin verb audire, is the root that has to do with hearing. What is audible can be heard. An audience is a group of listeners, sometimes seated in an auditorium. And audio today can mean almost anything that has to do with sound.::
::	auditor auditory audition inaudible

SON is the Latin root meaning “sound.” Sonata, meaning a piece for one or two instruments, was originally an Italian verb meaning “sounded” (when singers were involved, the Italians used a different verb). And sonorous means full, loud, or rich in sound.::
::	sonic dissonant resonance ultrasonic

ERR, from the Latin verb errare, means “to wander” or “to stray.” The root is seen in the word error, meaning a wandering or straying from what is correct or true. Erratum (plural, errata) is Latin for “mistake”; so an errata page is a book page that lists mistakes found too late to correct before the book's publication.::
::	errant aberrant erratic erroneous

CED comes from the Latin verb cedere, meaning “to proceed” or “to yield.” Proceed itself employs the root, as does recede, and their related nouns procession and recession employ another form of the Latin verb.::
::	cede concede accede precedent dragon's lethargic stygian

VIS SPECT VOC PHON CUR PERI SENS SOPH Words from Mythology and History::
::	

VIS comes from a Latin verb meaning “see.” Vision is what enables us to see, visual images are visible to our eyes, and a visitor is someone who comes to see something. The same verb actually gives us another root, vid-, as in Julius Caesar's famous statement about his military exploits, “Veni, vidi, vici” (“I came, I saw, I conquered”), and such common English words as video.::
::	vista vis-à-vis visionary envisage

SPECT comes from the Latin verb specere, meaning “to look at,” and produces several familiar English words. Spectacles can be glasses that you look through; but a spectacle can also be a remarkable sight—in Roman times, perhaps a spectacular chariot race or a spectacularly bloody battle between gladiators and wild beasts, mounted for the pleasure of its spectators.::
::	aspect prospect perspective prospectus

VOC comes from the Latin words meaning “voice” and “speak.” So a vocal ensemble is a singing group. A vocation was originally a “calling” from God to do religious work as a priest, monk, or nun, though today most people use the word just to mean a career. And a vocabulary is a set of words for speaking.::
::	equivocate irrevocable advocate vociferous

PHON is a Greek root meaning “sound,” “voice,” or “speech.” It's probably most familiar in the form of the English suffix -phone, in words that begin with a Greek or Latin root as well. Thus, the tele- in telephone means “far,” the micro- in microphone means “small,” the xylo- in xylophone means “wood,” and so on.::
::	phonics phonetic polyphonic cacophony

CUR, from the Latin verb curare, means basically “care for.” Our verb cure comes from this root, as do manicure (“care of the hands”) and pedicure (“care of the feet”).::
::	curative curator procure sinecure

PERI, in both Latin and Greek, means “around.” A period is often a span of time that keeps coming around regularly, day after day or year after year. With a periscope, you can see around corners. Peristalsis is the process that moves food around the intestines; without it, digestion would grind to a halt.::
::	perimeter periodontal peripatetic peripheral

SENS comes from the Latin noun sensus, meaning “feeling” or “sense.” Sense itself obviously comes straight from the Latin. A sensation is something you sense. And if you're sensitive, you feel or sense things sharply, maybe even too sharply.::
::	sensor desensitize extrasensory sensuous

SOPH come from the Greek words meaning “wise” and “wisdom.” In English the root sometimes appears in words where the wisdom is of the “wise guy” variety, but in words such as philosophy we see it used more respectfully.::
::	sophistry sophisticated sophomoric theosophy arcadia cyclopean draconian myrmidon nemesis

PORT PEND PAN EXTRA PHOT LUC MOR/MORT TROPH Words from Mythology and History::
::	

PORT comes from the Latin verb portare, meaning “to carry.” Thus, something portable can be carried around. A porter carries your luggage, whether through a train station or high into the Himalayas. When we transport something, we have it carried from one place to another. And goods for export are carried away to another country.::
::	portage portfolio comport deportment

PEND comes from the Latin verb pendere, meaning “to hang” or “to weigh.” (In the Roman era, weighing something large often required hanging it from a hook on one side of the balance scales.) We find the root in English words like appendix, referring to that useless and sometimes troublesome tube that hangs from the intestine, or that section at the back of some books that might contain some useful additional information.::
::	pendant append appendage suspend

PAN comes from a Greek word meaning “all”; as an English prefix, it can also mean “completely,” “whole,” or “general.” A panoramic view is a complete view in every direction. A pantheon is a temple dedicated to all the gods of a religion. A pandemic outbreak of a disease may not affect the entire human population, but enough to produce a catastrophe.::
::	panacea pandemonium pantheism panoply

EXTRA is Latin for “outside” or “beyond.” So anything extraterrestrial or extragalactic takes place beyond the earth or the galaxy. Something extravagant, such as an extravaganza, goes way beyond the normal. And extra is naturally a word itself, a shortening of extraordinary, “beyond the ordinary.”::
::	extradite extrapolate extrovert extraneous

PHOT comes from the Greek word for “light.” Photography uses light to create an image on film or paper, and a photocopy is an image made by using light and tiny electrically charged ink particles.::
::	photoelectric photovoltaic photon photosynthesis

LUC comes from the Latin noun lux, “light,” and the verb lucere, “to shine or glitter.” In ancient Rome, Lucifer, meaning “Light-bearer,” was the name given to the morning star, but the name was eventually transferred by Christians to Satan. This tradition, which dates back to the period before Christ, said that Lucifer had once been among the angels but had wanted to be the great light in the sky, and for his pride had been cast out of heaven and thus became the opponent of everything good.::
::	lucid elucidate lucubration translucent

MOR/MORT comes from Latin words meaning “to die” and “death.” A mortuary is a place where dead bodies are kept until burial, and a postmortem examination is one conducted on a recently dead body. The Latin phrase “Memento mori” means “Remember that you must die”; so a memento mori is the name we give to a reminder of death; the skulls you can find carved on gravestones in old cemeteries are examples.::
::	mortality moribund amortize mortify

TROPH comes from the Greek trophe, meaning “nourishment.” This particular troph- root doesn't show up in many everyday English words (the troph- in words like trophy, apostrophe, and catastrophe has a different meaning), but instead tends to appear in scientific terms.::
::	atrophy hypertrophy dystrophy eutrophication aeolian cynosure laconic mnemonic platonic sapphic solecism

HER FUG COSM SCI JUNCT PART MIS PEL Words from Mythology::
::	

HER comes from the Latin verb haerere, meaning “to stick.” Another form of the verb produces the root hes-, seen in such words as adhesive, which means basically “sticky” or “sticking,” and hesitate, which means more or less “stuck in one place.”::
::	adherent cohere incoherent inherent

FUG comes from the Latin verb fugere, meaning “to flee or escape.” Thus, a refugee flees from some threat or danger, while a fugitive is usually fleeing from the law.::
::	centrifugal refuge fugue subterfuge

COSM comes from the Greek word for “order.” Since the Greeks believed the universe was an orderly place, words in this group usually relate to the universe. So cosmonaut was the word for a space traveler from the former Soviet Union. (The roots of our own word, astronaut, suggest “star traveler” instead.) Oddly enough, cosmetics comes from the same root, since putting things in order is similar to decorating something—such as your face.::
::	cosmos cosmology microcosm cosmopolitan

SCI comes from the Latin verb scire, “to know” or “to understand.” The root appears in such common words as science, which originally meant simply “knowledge,” and conscience, meaning “moral knowledge.” And to be conscious is to be in a state where you are able to know or understand.::
::	conscientious nescience prescient unconscionable

JUNCT comes from the Latin verb jungere, meaning “to join.” A junction is a place where roads or railways come together. A conjunction is a word that joins two other words or groups of words: “this and that,” “to be or not to be.”::
::	juncture adjunct disjunction conjunct

PART, from the Latin word pars, meaning “part,” comes into English most obviously in our word part. An apartment or compartment is part of a larger whole. The same is usually true of a particle.::
::	bipartite impartial participle partisan

MIS comes from the Latin verb mittere, “to send.” A missile is something sent speeding through the air or water. And when your class is dismissed at the end of the day, you're sent home.::
::	mission missionary emissary transmission

PEL comes from the Latin verb pellere, meaning “to move or drive.” So a propeller moves a small airplane forward. And if you dispel someone's fears, you “drive them away.”::
::	compel expel impel repel arachnid calliope dryad fauna flora herculean

PUT LOG TERR MAR PATH PEN/PUN MATR/MATER AQU Words from Mythology::
::	

PUT comes from the Latin verb putare, meaning “to think, consider, or believe.” So, for example, a reputation is what others think of you. But when the root shows up in such words as compute, dispute, and deputy, its meaning is harder to trace.::
::	reputed disrepute impute putative

LOG, from the Greek word logos, meaning “word,” “speech,” or “reason,” is found particularly in English words that end in -logy and -logue. The ending -logy often means “the study of”; so, for instance, biology is the study of life, and anthropology is the study of humans. And -logue usually indicates a type of discussion; thus, dialogue is conversation between two people or groups, and an epilogue is an author's last words on a subject. But exceptions aren't hard to find.::
::	physiology methodology ideology cardiology

TERR comes from the Latin terra, “earth.” A territory is a large expanse of land. Terra firma is Latin for “firm ground” as opposed to the swaying seas. A terrace is a leveled area, often one created for farming on a sloping hill. And the French word for potato, pomme de terre, means literally “apple of the earth.”::
::	parterre subterranean terrarium terrestrial

MAR, from the Latin word mare, meaning “sea,” brings its salty tang to several English words. A submarine is an undersea ship. Marine means basically “relating to the sea,” so when the Continental Marines were established back in 1775, their job was to provide on-board security on naval ships; but they immediately began to be used on land as well, and the marines have continued to operate on both land and sea ever since.::
::	marina aquamarine mariner maritime

PATH comes from the Greek word pathos, which means “feeling” or “suffering.” So a pathetic sight moves us to pity, and a sympathetic friend “feels with” you when you yourself are suffering.::
::	pathos apathetic empathy telepathic

PEN/PUN comes from the Latin words poena, “penalty,” and punire, “to punish.” A penalty is, of course, a punishment.::
::	penal impunity penance punitive

MATR/MATER comes from the Greek and Latin words for “mother.” A matron is a mature woman with children. And matrimony is marriage itself, the traditional first step toward motherhood.::
::	maternity matriarch matrilineal matrix

AQU comes from aqua, the Latin word for “water.” We keep pet fish in an aquarium at home or visit larger sea animals in a building with that name. Water sports such as swimming, canoeing, and sailing are sometimes called aquatics. In Scandinavia there's a popular drink called aquavit, the name coming from the Latin aqua vitae, “water of life”—though instead of water it mostly consists of alcohol.::
::	aquaculture aquanaut aqueduct aquifer cereal martial titanic vulcanize

CANT LINGU SPIR VER TURB VOLU/VOLV FAC LUM Words from Mythology and History::
::	

CANT, from the Latin verb cantare, meaning “sing,” produces several words that come directly from Latin. But some others came to English by way of French, which added an h to the root, giving us such words as chant and chantey.::
::	cantata incantation cantor descant

LINGU comes from the Latin word that means both “tongue” and “language,” and in English today tongue can still mean “language” (as in “her native tongue”). Our expression “slip of the tongue” is just a translation of the Latin phrase lapsus linguae. The root even shows up in a slangy-sounding word like lingo. And since lingu- changed to langu- in French, our word language is related as well.::
::	linguistics multilingual lingua linguine

SPIR comes from the Latin words meaning “breath” and “breathe.” When we inspire others—that is, give them inspiration—it's as though we're breathing new energy and imagination into them. When you expire, or die, you “breathe out” your soul in your last breath. A license, membership, credit card, or free offer may also expire, at a time indicated by its expiration date.::
::	spirited dispiriting respirator transpire

VER comes from the Latin word for “truth.” A verdict in a trial is “the truth spoken” (see DICT). But a just verdict may depend on the veracity, or “truthfulness,” of the witnesses.::
::	verify aver verisimilitude veracity

TURB comes from the Latin verb turbare, “to throw into confusion or upset,” and the noun turba, “crowd” or “confusion.” So a disturbance, for example, confuses and upsets normal order or routine.::
::	turbid perturb turbine turbulent

VOLU/VOLV comes from the Latin verb volvere, meaning “to roll, wind, turn around, or twist around.” Thus, revolve simply means “turn in circles.” And a volume was originally a scroll or roll of papyrus.::
::	voluble devolve evolution convoluted

FAC comes from the Latin verb facere, meaning “to make or do.” Thus, a fact was originally simply “something done.” A benefactor is someone who does good. And to manufacture is to make, usually in a factory.::
::	factor factotum facile facilitate

LUM comes from the Latin noun lumen, meaning “light.” Thus, our word illuminate means “to supply with light” or “make clear,” and illumination is light that shines on something.::
::	lumen luminous bioluminescent luminary muse iridescent mausoleum mentor narcissism tantalize thespian zephyr

UMBR VEST THE/THEO ICON URB CULT DEM/DEMO POPUL Animal Words::
::	

UMBR comes from the Latin umbra, meaning “shadow.” Thus, the familiar umbrella, with its ending meaning “little,” casts a “little shadow” to keep off the sun or the rain.::
::	umber adumbrate penumbra umbrage

VEST comes from the Latin verb vestire, “to clothe” or “to dress,” and the noun vestis, “clothing” or “garment.” Vest is the shortest English word we have from this root, and is the name of a rather small piece of clothing.::
::	divest investiture transvestite travesty

THE/THEO comes from the Greek word meaning “god.” Theology, the study of religion, is practiced by theologians. Monotheism is the worship of a single god; Christianity, Islam, and Judaism are monotheistic religions, and all three worship the same god. Polytheistic religions such as those of ancient Greece and Rome, on the other hand, worship many gods.::
::	apotheosis atheistic pantheon theocracy

ICON comes from the Greek eikon, which led to the Latin icon, both meaning “image.” Though the icon- root hasn't produced many English words, the words that is does appear in tend to be interesting.::
::	icon iconic iconoclast iconography

URB comes from the Latin noun for “city.” Our word urban describes cities and the people who live in them. With its sub- prefix (see SUB), a suburb is a town “near” or “under” a larger city, and suburban houses are home to suburbanites.::
::	urbane exurban interurban urbanization

CULT comes from the Latin cultus, meaning “care.” So cultivation is care of something, such as a garden, in a way that encourages its growth. And culture is what is produced by cultivating human knowledge, skills, beliefs, manners, science, and art over many years.::
::	acculturation cross-cultural horticulture subculture

DEM/DEMO comes from the Greek word meaning “people.” “Government by the people” was invented by the ancient Greeks, so it's appropriate that they were the first to come up with a word for it: demokratia, or democracy.::
::	demographic endemic demagogue demotic

POPUL comes from the Latin word meaning “people,” and in fact forms the basis of the word people itself. So the population is the people of an area, and popular means not only “liked by many people” but also (as in popular culture) “relating to the general public.”::
::	populist populace populous vox aquiline asinine bovine canine feline leonine porcine vulpine

CORD CULP DICT GNI/GNO GRAPH ART FORT CIS Animal Words::
::	

CORD, from the Latin word for “heart,” turns up in several common English words. So does its Greek relative card-, which is familiar to us in words such as cardiac, “relating to the heart.”::
::	accord concord cordial discordant

CULP comes from the Latin word for “guilt.” Its best-known appearance in English is probably in culprit, meaning someone who is guilty of a crime.::
::	culpable exculpate inculpate mea

DICT comes from dicere, the Latin word meaning “to speak.” So a dictionary is a treasury of words for speaking. And a contradiction (with its prefix contra-, “against”) speaks against or denies something.::
::	diction edict jurisdiction dictum

GNI/GNO comes from a Greek and Latin verb meaning “to know,” and can be found at the root of know itself. Among other words built from this root, you may recognize (“know again”) some and be ignorant of (“not know”) others. But only an ignoramus would know absolutely none of them.::
::	cognitive agnostic incognito prognosis

GRAPH comes from the Greek verb graphein, “to write.” Thus, a biography is a written account of someone's life (see BIO), a discography is a written list of recordings on disc (records or CDs), and a filmography is a list of motion pictures. But lots of uses of -graph and -graphy don't mean literally “writing” (as in autograph or paragraph), but instead something more like “recording,” as in photography, seismograph, or graph itself.::
::	calligraphy hagiography choreography lithograph

ART comes from the Latin word for “skill.” This reminds us that, until a few centuries ago, almost no one made a strong distinction between skilled craftsmanship and what we would now call “art.” And the word art itself could also mean simply “cleverness.” The result is that this root appears in some words where we might not expect it.::
::	artful artifact artifice artisan

FORT comes from fortis, Latin for “strong.” The familiar noun fort, meaning a building strengthened against possible attacks, comes directly from it. And our verb comfort actually means “to give strength and hope to.”::
::	fortify fortification forte fortitude

CIS comes from the Latin verb meaning “to cut, cut down, or slay.” An incisor is one of the big front biting teeth; beavers and woodchucks have especially large ones. A decision “cuts off” previous discussion and uncertainty.::
::	concise excise incisive precision apiary caper equestrian lupine ovine ornithologist serpentine simian

CRYPT AB/ABS PED- TROP NEO NOV POS TEN MONO UNI Number Words::
::	

CRYPT comes from the Greek word for “hidden.” To encrypt a message is to encode it—that is, to hide its meaning in code language. When a scientific term begins with crypto-, it always means that there's something hidden about it .::
::	crypt encrypt cryptic cryptography

AB/ABS comes to us from Latin, and means “from,” “away,” or “off.” Abuse is the use of something in the wrong way. To abduct is to “lead away from” or kidnap. Aberrant behavior is behavior that “wanders away from” what is acceptable. But there are so many words that include these roots that it would be absurd to try to list them all here.::
::	abscond abstemious abstraction abstruse

PED- comes from the Greek word for “child.” The same root also has the meaning “foot” (see PED), but in English words it usually isn't hard to tell the two apart.::
::	pedagogy pedant pediatrician encyclopedic

TROP comes from the Greek tropos, meaning “turn” or “change.” The troposphere is the level of the atmosphere where most weather changes—or “turns in the weather”—occur. And the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn are the lines of latitude where the sun is directly overhead when it reaches its northernmost and southernmost points, on about June 22 and December 22 every year—that is, the point where it seems to turn and go back the other way.::
::	tropism entropy heliotrope psychotropic

NEO comes from the Greek neos, meaning “new.” Neo- has become a part of many English words. Some are easy to understand; for example, neo-Nazi. Some are less so; you might not immediately guess that neotropical means “from the tropics of the New World,” or that a neophyte is a “newcomer.” When William Ramsay discovered four new gases, he named them all using Greek roots that at first glance might sound slightly mysterious: argon (“idle”), krypton (“hidden”), xenon (“strange”)—and neon (“new”).::
::	neoclassic neoconservative neonatal

NOV comes from the Latin word novus, meaning “new.” To renovate an old house is to “make it new again”—that is, put it back in tip-top shape. The long-running PBS show Nova keeps its large audience up to date on what's new in the world of science. And when the British king sent Scottish settlers to a large island off Canada's Atlantic coast in the 17th century, he named it Nova Scotia, or “New Scotland.”::
::	novice novel innovation supernova

POS comes from the Latin verb ponere, meaning “to put” or “to place.” You expose film by “placing it out” in the light. You compose a song by “putting together” a series of notes. And you oppose locating a new prison in your town by “putting yourself against” it.::
::	impose juxtapose transpose superimpose

TEN, from the Latin verb tenere, basically means “hold” or “hold on to.” A tenant is the “holder” of an apartment, house, or land, but not necessarily the owner. A lieutenant governor may “hold the position” ( “serve in lieu”) of the governor when necessary.::
::	tenure tenacious tenable tenet

MONO comes from the Greek monos, meaning “along” or “single.” So a monorail is a railroad that has only one rail; a monocle is an old-fashioned eyeglass that a gentleman used to squeeze into his eye socket; a monotonous voice seems to have only one tone; and a monopoly puts all ownership of a type of product or service in the hands of a single company.::
::	monogamous monoculture monolithic monotheism

UNI comes from the Latin word for “one.” A uniform is a single design worn by everyone. A united group has one single opinion, or forms a single unit. A unitard is a one-piece combination leotard and tights, very good for skating, skiing, dancing—or riding a one-wheeled unicycle.::
::	unicameral unilateral unison unitarian

TERM/TERMIN GEO SPHER VERT MORPH FORM DOC/DOCT TUT/TUI DI/DUP BI/BIN Number Words::
::	

TERM/TERMIN comes from the Latin verb terminare, “to limit, bound, or set limits to,” and the noun terminus, “limit or boundary.” In English, those boundaries or limits tend to be final. A term goes on for a given amount of time and then ends, and to terminate a sentence or a meeting or a ballgame means to end it.::
::	terminal indeterminate interminable terminus

GEO comes from the Greek word for “Earth.” Geography is the science that deals with features of the Earth's surface. Geologists study rocks and soil to learn about the Earth's history and resources. Geometry was originally about measuring portions of the Earth's surface, probably originally in order to determine where the boundaries of Egyptians' farms lay after the annual flooding by the Nile River.::
::	geocentric geophysics geostationary geothermal

SPHER comes from the Greek word for “ball.” A ball is itself a sphere, as is the ball that we call Earth. So is the atmosphere, and so are several other invisible “spheres” that encircle the Earth.::
::	spherical stratosphere biosphere hemisphere

VERT comes from the Latin verb vertere, meaning “to turn” or “to turn around.” Vertigo is the dizziness that makes it seem as if everything is turning around you. And an advertisement turns your attention to a product or service.::
::	divert converter avert revert

MORPH comes from the Greek word for “shape.” Morph is itself an English word with a brand-new meaning, which was needed when we began to digitally alter photographic images or shapes to make them move or transform themselves in often astonishing ways.::
::	amorphous anthropomorphic metamorphosis morphology

FORM is the Latin root meaning “shape” or “form.” When you march in formation, you're moving in ordered patterns. And a formula is a standard form for expressing information, such as a rule written in mathematical symbols, or the “Sincerely yours” that often ends a letter.::
::	format conform formality formative

DOC/DOCT comes from the Latin docere, which means “to teach.” So, for instance, a doctor was originally a highly educated person capable of instructing others in a field—which usually wasn't medicine.::
::	doctrine docent doctrinaire indoctrinate

TUT/TUI comes from a Latin verb meaning “to look after,” and in English the root generally shows up in words that include the meaning “guide,” “guard,” or “teach”—such as tutor, the name for a private teacher who guides a student (or tutee) through a subject.::
::	tutorial tuition intuition tutelage

DI/DUP, Greek and Latin prefixes meaning “two,” show up in both technical and nontechnical terms, with dup- sometimes shortened to du-. So a duel is a battle between two people. A duet is music for a duo, or pair of musicians. A duplicate is an exact copy, or twin. And if you have dual citizenship, you belong to two countries at once.::
::	dichotomy dimorphic duplex duplicity

BI/BIN also means “two” or “double.” A bicycle has two wheels, and binoculars consist of two little telescopes. Bigamy is marriage to two people at once. And a road built through the middle of a neighborhood bisects it into two pieces.::
::	bipartisan binary biennial bipolar

TOP CENTR/CENTER DOM OMNI HOL/HOLO RETRO TEMPOR CHRON TRI Number Words::
::	

TOP comes from topos, the Greek word for “place.” A topic is a subject rather than a place; to the Greeks, the original word meant more or less “about one place or subject (rather than another)”—which just goes to show that it's not always easy to trace a word's meaning from its roots.::
::	topical ectopic utopian topography

CENTR/CENTER comes from the Greek kentron and the Latin centrum, meaning “sharp point” or “center point of a circle.” A centrifuge is a spinning machine that throws things outward from the center; the apparent force that pushes them outward is called centrifugal force.::
::	eccentric epicenter egocentric ethnocentric

DOM comes from the Latin domus, “house,” and dominus, “master,” and the two are indeed related. In the Bible, King Ahasuerus, angered by his queen's disobedience, proclaims that “every man is to be master of his own house,” and in the Roman empire no one doubted that this was how it was meant to be. A domain is the area where a person has authority or is dominant—but we no longer think of a house as the domain of a single dominant member of a family.::
::	dominion predominant domineering domination

OMNI comes from the Latin word omnis, meaning “all.” So in English words, omni- can mean “in all ways,” “in all places,” or “without limits.” An omnidirectional antenna, for example, is one that receives or sends radio waves equally well in all directions. And Omni by itself has been used repeatedly as a brand name for things as different as a hotel chain and a science magazine.::
::	omnivore omnipotent omnibus omniscient

HOL/HOLO, meaning “whole,” comes from the Greek word holos, with the same meaning. The root can be found in catholic. When capitalized, Catholic refers to the worldwide Christian church based in Rome, which was once the “whole”—that is, the only—Christian church. Without the capital letter, catholic means simply “universal” or, when describing a person, “broad in one's interests or tastes.”::
::	holistic hologram holocaust

RETRO means “back,” “backward,” or “behind” in Latin. Retro in English is generally a prefix, but has also become a word in its own right, usually used to describe old styles or fashions.::
::	retroactive retrofit retrogress retrospective

TEMPOR comes from the Latin tempus, meaning “time.” A temporary repair is meant to last only a short time. The tempo, or speed, of a country-and-western ballad is usually different from that of a hip-hop number. The Latin phrase Tempus fugit means “Time flies,” an observation that seems more true during summer vacation than in the dead of winter.::
::	temporal contemporary extemporaneous temporize

CHRON comes from the Greek word for “time.” A chronicle records the events of a particular time, which is why so many newspapers have the name Chronicle. A chronometer is a device for measuring time, usually one that's more accurate (and more expensive) than an ordinary watch or clock.::
::	chronic chronology anachronism synchronous

TRI means “three,” whether derived from Greek or Latin. A tricycle has three wheels. A triangle has three sides and three angles. And a triumvirate is a board or government of three people.::
::	triad trilogy triceratops trident trimester trinity triptych trivial

ANIM FIG ANN/ENN EV CORP TANG/TACT CODI/CODE SIGN QUADR/QUART TETR Number Words::
::	

ANIM comes from the Latin anima, meaning “breath” or “soul.” So, for example, an animal is a living, breathing thing—though human animals have often argued about whether other species actually have souls.::
::	animated magnanimous animosity inanimate

FIG comes from a Latin verb meaning “to shape or mold” and a noun meaning “a form or shape.” So a figure is usually a shape. A transfiguration transforms the shape or appearance of something. And a disfiguring injury changes the appearance of part of the body for the worse.::
::	figurative configuration effigy figment

ANN/ENN comes from Latin annus, meaning “year.” An annual event occurs yearly. An anniversary is an example of an annual event, although the older you get the more frequent they seem to be.::
::	annuity superannuated millennium perennial

EV comes from the Latin aevum, “age” or “lifetime.” Though the root occurs in only a few English words, it's related to the Greek aion, “age,” from which we get the word eon, meaning “a very long period of time.”::
::	coeval longevity medieval primeval

CORP comes from corpus, the Latin word for “body.” A corpse is a dead body. A corporation is also a kind of body, since it may act almost like an individual. And a corps is a “body” of soldiers.::
::	corporeal corpulent corporal incorporate

TANG/TACT comes from the Latin words tangere, “to touch,” and tactus, “sense of touch.” So, for instance, to make contact is to touch or “get in touch with.”::
::	tact tactile tangential tangible

CODI/CODE comes from the Latin codex, meaning “trunk of a tree” or “document written on wooden tablets.” A code can be either a set of laws or a system of symbols used to write messages. To encode a message is to write it in code. A genetic code, transmitted by genes, is a set of instructions for everything from blood type to eye color.::
::	codex codicil codify decode

SIGN comes from the Latin noun signum, “mark or sign.” A signal is a kind of sign. Your signature is your own personal sign. And an architect's design marks out the pattern for a building.::
::	signify insignia signatory signet

QUADR/QUART comes from Latin words meaning “four” or “fourth.” In English, a quart is one-fourth of a gallon, just as a quarter is one-fourth of a dollar. A quadrangle has four sides and angles but isn't necessarily square. And quadruplets are four babies born at the same time.::
::	quadrant quadrille quadriplegic quartile

TETR comes from the Greek word for “four.” In the immensely popular video game Tetris, for example, each of the pieces the game is played with has four segments. But the root usually shows up in long chemical names.::
::	tetracycline tetrahedron tetralogy tetrapod

CAPIT ANTHROP KINE DYNAM GRAD REG CRIT JUR PENT QUINT Number Words::
::	

CAPIT, from the Latin word for “head,” caput, turns up in some important places. The head of a ship is its captain, and the capital of a state or country is where the “head of state” works. A capital letter stands head and shoulders above a lowercase letter, as well as at the head (beginning) of a sentence.::
::	capitalism capitulate decapitate recapitulate

ANTHROP comes from the Greek word for “human being.” So an anthropomorphic god, such as Zeus or Athena, basically looks and acts like a human. And in Aesop's fables and many animated cartoons, animals are usually anthropomorphized and behave exactly like furry, four-legged human beings.::
::	anthropoid anthropology misanthropic lycanthropy

KINE comes from the Greek word kinesis, meaning “movement.” Kinetic energy is the energy of motion (as opposed to potential energy, the kind of energy held by a stretched elastic band). Kinetic art is art that has moving parts, such as Alexander Calder's famous mobiles. And cinema, the art of moving pictures, actually comes from the same kine- root as well.::
::	kinesiology hyperkinetic kinescope telekinesis

DYNAM comes from the Greek dynamis, meaning “power.” A dyne is a unit used in measuring force; an instrument that measures force is called a dynamometer. And when Alfred Nobel invented a powerful explosive in 1867, he named it dynamite.::
::	dynamic dynamo aerodynamics hydrodynamic

GRAD comes from the Latin noun gradus, “step” or “degree,” and the verb gradi, “to step, walk.” A grade is a step up or down on a scale of some kind, and a gradual change takes place in small steps.::
::	gradation degrade gradient retrograde

REG, from the Latin regula, meaning “rule,” has given us many English words. Something regular follows a rule of some kind, even if it's just a law of nature. A regime can be a form of rule or government. To regulate an industry means to make and enforce rules, or regulations, for it; removing such rules is called deregulation.::
::	regimen interregnum regalia regency

CRIT comes from a Greek verb that means “to judge” or “to decide.” So a film critic judges a movie and tells us what's good or bad about it. Her critical opinion may convince us not to go, or we may overlook any negative criticism and see it anyway.::
::	criterion critique hypercritical hematocrit

JUR comes from the Latin verb jurare, “to swear, take an oath,” and the noun jus, “right or law.” A jury, made up of jurors, makes judgments based on the law. And a personal injury was originally something done to you that a court would find unjust.::
::	jurisprudence abjure perjury de

PENT comes from the Greek word for “five.” The Pentagon in Washington, D.C., the world's largest office building, has five sides just like any other pentagon. And a pentatonic scale in music has only five notes, rather than the seven notes of the major or minor scale.::
::	pentathlon pentameter

QUINT comes from the Latin word meaning “five.” Quintuplets are babies that come in sets of five; about 60 U.S. families increase in size by that number every year.::
::	quincentennial quintessential quintet quintile

BIO GEN FUNCT MUT FRACT TELE PHIL NEG DEC CENT Number Words::
::	

BIO comes from the Greek word for “life,” and forms the base for many English words. Biology, for instance, is the study of living forms and life processes; the biosphere is the entire area of and above the earth where life can exist; and biotechnology is the use of living organisms to create useful products.::
::	bionic biopsy biodegradable symbiosis

GEN, which comes from the Greek genos, meaning “birth,” has generated dozens of English words. A set of genes, for instance, gives birth to a living being. And a genealogy is a historical map of your family, showing how each generation gave birth to the next.::
::	genesis generator genre carcinogenic

FUNCT comes from the Latin verb fungi, “to perform, carry out.” If your car is functional, it's able to perform its function of providing transportation. But a functional illiterate is a person who, for all practical or functional purposes, might as well not be able to read or write at all.::
::	functionary malfunction defunct dysfunctional

MUT comes from the Latin mutare, “to change.” Plenty of science-fiction movies—Godzilla, The Fly, The Incredible Shrinking Man—used to be made on the subject of weird mutations, changes in normal people or animals that usually end up causing death and destruction. What causes the unfortunate victim to mutate may be a mysterious or alien force, or perhaps invisible radiation. Though the science in these films isn't always right on target, the scare factor of an army of mutants can be hard to beat.::
::	commute immutable permutation transmute

FRACT comes from the Latin verb frangere, “to break or shatter.” A fraction is one of the pieces into which a whole can be broken, and a fracture is a break in a wall, a rock, or a bone.::
::	fractious fractal infraction refraction

TELE has as its basic meanings “distant” or “at a distance.” A telescope is for looking at far-off objects; a camera's telephoto lens magnifies a distant scene for a photograph; and a television lets us watch things taking place far away.::
::	telegenic teleological telemetry telecommute

PHIL comes from the Greek word meaning “love.” In philosophy, it's joined with sophia, “wisdom,” so philosophy means literally “love of wisdom.” When joined with biblio-, “book,” the result is bibliophile, or “lover of books.” And Philadelphia, containing the Greek word adelphos, “brother,” was named by its Quaker founder, William Penn, as the city of “brotherly love.”::
::	oenophile philatelist philanthropy

NEG and its variants nec- and ne- are prefixes of denial or refusal in Latin, and the Latin verb negare means “to say no.” To negate something is to make it ineffective, and something negative denies, contradicts, refuses, or reverses.::
::	negligent abnegation negligible renege

DEC comes from both Greek and Latin and means “ten.” So a decade lasts for ten years; the decimal system is based on ten; and a decahedron is a geometrical shape with ten sides.::
::	decalogue decathlon decibel decimate

CENT, from the Latin centum, means “one hundred.” A dollar is made up of a hundred cents, though other monetary systems use centavos or centimes as the smallest coin. A centipede has what appears to be a hundred feet, though the actual number varies greatly. But there really are a hundred years in a century.::
::	centenary centigrade centimeter centurion

NOM PATER/PATR LEGA GREG FLU PREHEND/PREHENS TEMPER PURG MILL HEMI/SEMI Number Words::
::	

NOM comes from the Latin word for “name.” A nominee is a person “named”—or nominated—to run for or serve in office. A binomial (“two names”) is the scientific name for a species: Felis catus for the house cat, for example. A polynomial, with “many names,” is an algebra expression involving several terms: 2x2 + 9y – z3, for instance.::
::	nominal nomenclature ignominious misnomer

PATER/PATR comes from both the Greek and the Latin word for “father.” So a patron, for example, is someone who assumes a fatherly role toward an institution or project or individual, giving moral and financial support.::
::	patrician patriarchy expatriate paternalistic

LEGA comes from the Latin legare, meaning “to appoint” or “to send as a deputy.” The same root actually shows up in such words as legal—but how the law connects with sending deputies can get awfully complicated and probably isn't worth going into.::
::	legate legacy delegation relegate

GREG comes from the Latin grex, “herd” or “flock.” Bees, starlings, cows—any creatures that like to live together in flocks or herds—are called gregarious, and the same word is used for people who enjoy companionship and are happiest when they're in the middle of a rowdy herd.::
::	aggregate congregation egregious segregate

FLU comes from the Latin verb fluere, “to flow.” So a flume is a narrow gorge with a stream flowing through it. A fluent speaker is one from whom words flow easily. Influence originally referred to an invisible fluid that was believed to flow from the stars and to affect the actions of humans. A mysterious outbreak of disease in 15th-century Italy led Italians to blame it on the stars' influenza—and the name stuck.::
::	affluence effluent confluence mellifluous

PREHEND/PREHENS comes from the Latin verb prehendere, “to seize.” Most of the English words where it appears are closely related to the ones discussed below.::
::	prehensile apprehend comprehend reprehensible

TEMPER comes from the Latin verb temperare, “to moderate or keep within limits” or “to mix.” Most of the world's people live in the temperate zone—that is, the zone where the temperature is moderate, between the hot tropics and the icy Arctic and Antarctic Circles. It's less easy to see how we get temperature from this root; the word actually used to refer to the mixing of different basic elements in the body, and only slowly came to mean how hot or cold that body was.::
::	temper temperance intemperate distemper

PURG comes from the Latin verb purgare, “to clean or cleanse.” Almost all the English words where it shows up are closely related to those discussed below.::
::	purge expurgate purgative purgatory

MILL means either “a thousand” or “a thousandth.” A millennium is a thousand years, and a million is a thousand thousands. But a milligram is a thousandth of a gram, a milliliter a thousandth of a liter, and a millimeter a thousandth of a meter.::
::	millefleur millenarianism millipede millisecond

HEMI/SEMI means “half.” Hemi- comes from Greek, semi- from Latin. A hemisphere is half a sphere, and a semicircle is half a circle. (The French prefix demi-, which probably developed from Latin as well, also means “half”—as in demitasse, a little after-dinner coffee cup half the size of a regular cup.)::
::	semitone semicolon hemiplegia semiconductor

SUB HYPER PRE PARA META PER ANT/ANTI CONTRA Greek and Latin Borrowings::
::	

SUB means “under.” So a subway runs under the streets, and a submarine moves under the ocean's surface. A subject is a person under the authority of another. A movie's subplot is lower in importance than the main plot. Subscribe once meant “to write one's name underneath,” so subscription was the act of signing a document or agreement.::
::	subconscious subjugate subliminal subversion

HYPER is a Greek prefix that means “above or beyond,” so hyper- often means about the same thing as super-. Hyperinflation is inflation that's growing at a very high rate. To be hypercritical or hypersensitive is to be critical or sensitive beyond the normal. And if you hyperextend a knee or elbow, it means you're actually bending it backward.::
::	hyperactive hyperbole hypertension hyperventilate

PRE, one of the most common of all English prefixes, comes from prae, the Latin word meaning “before” or “in front of.” So a prediction forecasts what will happen before it occurs. The 5:00 TV news precedes the 6:00 news. And someone with a prejudice against a class of people has judged them before having even met them.::
::	preclude precocious predispose prerequisite

PARA is a Greek prefix usually meaning “beside” or “closely related to.” So parallel lines run beside each other. And a Greek paragraphos was originally a line written beside the main text of a play to show where a new person begins speaking; today we just start a new paragraph on a new line.::
::	paraphrase paralegal paramedic paramilitary

META is a prefix in English that generally means “behind” or “beyond.” In medicine, for example, the metacarpal bones are the hand bones that come right after, or beyond, the carpal or wrist bones. And metalanguage is language used to talk about language, which requires going beyond normal language.::
::	metadata metaphorical metaphysics metonymy

PER is a Latin preposition that generally means “through,” “throughout,” or “thoroughly.” Thus, perforate means “to bore through,” perennial means “throughout the years,” and permanent means “remaining throughout.” And the “thoroughly” sense shows up in persuade, for “thoroughly advise,” and perverted, “thoroughly turned around.”::
::	percolate pervade permeate persevere

ANT/ANTI is a Latin prefix meaning “against.” An anticlimax is the opposite of a climax. An antiseptic or antibiotic fights germs. An antacid attacks acid in the stomach. And an antidote works against the effects of a poison.::
::	antagonist antigen antipathy antithesis

CONTRA is the Latin equivalent of anti-, and it too means essentially “against” or “contrary to.” A contrast “stands against” something else that it's compared to. And contrapuntal music, as in the music of Bach, sets one melody against another played at the same time and produces harmony (which no one is opposed to).::
::	contraband contraindication contravene contrarian in magnum memento habeas rigor sine tabula terra

ACER/ACR STRICT STRU/STRUCT PROP/PROPRI TORT VIV SERV CLUS Greek and Latin Borrowings::
::	

ACER/ACR comes from the Latin adjective acer, meaning “sharp” or “sour.” Grapefruit and limes have an acid taste; acid can also describe a person's sense of humor (other words for it might be sharp or biting). The acidity of the soil often indicates whether it's good for growing certain crops; blueberries, for instance, love acid soil, so they're more likely to be found east of the Mississippi River, where acid soil is the rule.::
::	acerbic acrid acrimony exacerbate

STRICT comes from the Latin verb meaning “to draw tight, bind, or tie.” So the English word strict means “tightly controlled.” And when someone begins a sentence “Strictly speaking, . . .” you know he or she is going to be talking about a word or idea in its most limited sense, “drawing tight” the meaning till it's as narrow as possible.::
::	stricture restrictive constrict vasoconstrictor

STRU/STRUCT comes from the Latin verb struere, meaning “to put together, build, arrange.” A structure is something that's been constructed,—that is, built or put together. Instructions tell how the pieces should be arranged. Something that obstructs is a barrier that's been “built” to stand in your way. And something destructive “unbuilds.”::
::	deconstruction infrastructure construe instrumental

PROP/PROPRI comes from the Latin word proprius, meaning “own.” A proprietor is an owner, and property is what he or she owns. And the original meaning of proper was “belonging to oneself,” so a writer around the year 1400 could say “With his own proper sword he was slain,” even if we might not say it quite the same way today.::
::	proprietary propriety appropriate expropriate

TORT comes from a form of the Latin verb torquere, meaning “to twist, wind, or wrench.” In torture, parts of the body may be wrenched or twisted or stretched; so those “Indian sunburns” that schoolkids give by twisting in different directions on some unlucky guy's wrist stay pretty close to torture's original meaning.::
::	tort extort contort tortuous

VIV comes from vivere, the Latin verb meaning “to live or be alive.” A survivor has lived through something terrible. A revival brings something back to life, whether it's an old film, interest in a long-dead novelist, or religious enthusiasm in a group, maybe in a huge tent in the countryside.::
::	vivacious bon revivify vivisection

SERV means “to be subject to.” A servant is the person who serves you with meals and provides other necessary services. A tennis or volleyball serve puts the ball in play, much as a servant puts food on the table.::
::	serviceable servile servitude subservient

CLUS comes from the Latin claudere, “to close.” Words based on the Latin verb often have forms in which the d becomes an s. So, for example, include, which once meant “to shut up or enclose” and now means “to contain,” has the related word inclusive, which means “including everything.”::
::	occlusion exclusive recluse seclusion acme catharsis colossus detritus hoi kudos onus stigma

TEXT PLAC AUT/AUTO GRAT CLAM/CLAIM CRAC/CRAT PUNC POT Greek and Latin Borrowings::
::	

TEXT comes from a Latin verb that means “to weave.” So a textile is a woven or knitted cloth. The material it's made from determines its texture, the smoothness or roughness of its surface. And individual words are “woven” into sentences and paragraphs to form a text.::
::	textual context hypertext subtext

PLAC comes from the Latin placere, “to please or be agreeable to,” or placare, “to soothe or calm.” Pleasant, pleasurable, and pleasing all derive from this root, even though their spelling makes it hard to see.::
::	placate placebo placidity implacable

AUT/AUTO comes from the Greek word for “same” or “self.” Something automatic operates by itself, and an automobile moves by itself, without the help of a horse. An autograph is in the handwriting of the person him- or herself, and an autopsy is an inspection of a corpse by an examiner's own eyes.::
::	automaton autoimmune autonomy autism

GRAT comes from the Latin words gratus, meaning “pleasing, welcome, or agreeable,” and gratia, meaning “grace, agreeableness, or pleasantness.” A meal that's served graciously will be received with gratitude by grateful guests; those who show no appreciation could be called ingrates.::
::	gratify gratuity gratuitous ingratiate

CLAM/CLAIM comes from the Latin verb clamare, meaning “to shout or cry out.” To claim often means “to call for.” And an exclamation is a cry of shock, joy, or surprise.::
::	clamor acclamation declaim proclaim

CRAC/CRAT comes from the Greek word meaning “power.” Attached to another root, it indicates which group holds the power. With demos, the Greek word for “people,” it forms democracy, a form of government in which the people rule. A theocracy, from the Greek theos, “god,” is government based on divine guidance. In a meritocracy, people earn power by their own merit.::
::	aristocrat autocratic bureaucrat plutocracy

PUNC comes from the Latin noun punctum, meaning “point.” A period is a form of punctuation that's literally a point, and a punctured tire has been pricked by a sharp point.::
::	punctilious punctual compunction acupuncture

POT comes from the Latin adjective potens, meaning “able.” Our English word potent means “powerful” or “effective,” whether for good or bad. A potent new antibiotic might be able to deal with infections that have developed resistance to older drugs; an industrial gas might be identified as a potent contributor to climate change; and a potent drink might leave you staggering.::
::	potential impotent plenipotentiary potentate ambrosia dogma gratis eureka per opus impetus thesis

MAND UND SANCT LOQU VIR VAL CRE/CRET FUS Greek and Latin Borrowings::
::	

MAND comes from mandare, Latin for “entrust” or “order.” A command is an order; a commandment is also an order, but usually one that comes from God. And a commando unit carries out orders for special military actions.::
::	mandate mandatory commandeer remand

UND comes into English from the Latin words unda, “wave,” and undare, “to rise in waves,” “to surge or flood.” Undulations are waves or wavelike things or motions, and to undulate is to rise and fall in a wavelike way.::
::	undulant inundate redound redundancy

SANCT, meaning “holy,” comes from the Latin word sanctus. Thus, sanctity means “holiness.” In ancient Greece, a spot could be sanctified, or “made holy,” by a group of priests who carried out a solemn ritual; these might be spots where fumes arose from a crack in the earth or where a spring of clear water flowed out of the ground, and a temple might be built there for worship of a god.::
::	sanction sanctimonious sacrosanct sanctuary

LOQU comes from the Latin verb loqui, “to talk.” An eloquent preacher speaks fluently, forcefully, and expressively. And a dummy's words come out of a ventriloquist's mouth—or perhaps out of his belly (in Latin, venter).::
::	colloquium soliloquy colloquial loquacious

VIR is Latin for “man.” A virtue is a good quality—originally, the kind of quality an ideal man possessed. And virtuous behavior is morally excellent. All in all, the Romans seem to have believed that being a man was a good thing.::
::	virility triumvirate virago virtuosity

VAL has as its basic meaning “strength,” from the Latin verb valere, meaning “to be worthy, healthy, or strong” and “to have power or influence.” So evaluating a house involves determining how healthy it is. A valid license or credit card is one that's still in effect, and a valid proof is one that provides strong evidence.::
::	valor equivalent prevalent validate

CRE/CRET comes from the Latin verb crescere, which means both “to come into being” and “to grow.” So a crescendo in music occurs when the music is growing louder, and a decrescendo when it's growing softer.::
::	crescent accretion excrescence increment

FUS comes from the Latin verb fundere, “to pour out” or “to melt.” A fuse depends on melting metal to break an overloaded circuit. Nuclear fusion involves the “melting” together of light nuclei to form heavier nuclei, and fusion cuisine brings together the cooking of two or more cultures.::
::	transfusion effusive profusion suffuse apologia atrium oligarchy encomium neurosis opprobrium referendum ultimatum

VERB SIMIL/SIMUL SCEND ONYM SCRIB/SCRIP FALL SOLU HYDR Greek and Latin Borrowings::
::	

VERB comes from the Latin verbum, meaning “word.” A verb—or action word—appears in some form in every complete sentence. To express something verbally—or to verbalize something—is to say it or write it.::
::	verbose proverb verbatim verbiage

SIMIL/SIMUL come from the Latin adjective similis, meaning “like, resembling, similar,” and the verb simulare, “to make like.” Two similar things resemble each other. Two simultaneous activities proceed at the same time. And a facsimile, such as you might receive from your fax machine, looks exactly the same as the original.::
::	simile assimilate simulacrum simulate

SCEND comes from the Latin verb scandere, “to climb.” The staircase we ascend to our bedroom at night we will descend the next morning, since what goes up must come down.::
::	transcend condescend descendant ascendancy

ONYM comes from the Greek onyma, meaning “name, word.” An anonymous donor or writer is one who isn't named. A synonym is a word with the same meaning as another word (see SYN). And homonyms (see HOM/HOMO) are words that look and sound alike but aren't actually related, such as well (“healthy”) and well (“a deep hole with water in it”).::
::	antonym eponymous patronymic pseudonym

SCRIB/SCRIP comes from the Latin verb scribere, “to write.” Scribble is an old word meaning to write or draw carelessly. A written work that hasn't been published is a manuscript. And to describe is to picture something in words.::
::	conscription circumscribe inscription proscribe

FALL comes from the Latin verb fallere, “to deceive.” It's actually at the root of the word false, which we rarely use today to mean “deceptive,” though that meaning does show up in older phrases: “Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor,” for instance, or “A false-hearted lover will send you to your grave.” Fallere is even at the root of fail and fault, though you might not guess it to look at them.::
::	fallacy fallacious fallibility infallible

SOLU comes from the Latin verb solvere, “to loosen, free, release,” and the root therefore may take the form solv- as well. So to solve a problem means to find its solution, as if you were freeing up a logjam. And a solvent is a chemical that dissolves or “loosens up” oil or paint.::
::	soluble absolution dissolution resolute

HYDR flows from the Greek word for “water.” The “water” root can be found in the lovely flower called the hydrangea: its seed capsules resemble ancient Greek water vessels.::
::	hydraulic dehydrate hydroelectric hydroponics aegis charisma ego ethos hubris id libido trauma

MUR POLIS/POLIT NUMER KILO MICRO MULTI PAR PHOB HEM/HEMO ITIS Medical Words::
::	

MUR, from the Latin noun murus, meaning “wall,” has produced a modest number of English words.::
::	muralist intramural extramural immure

POLIS/POLIT comes from the Greek word for “city.” The ancient Greek city-states, such as Athens, Thebes, and Sparta, operated much like separate nations, so all their politics was local, like all their public policy—and even all their police!::
::	politic politicize acropolis megalopolis

NUMER comes from the Latin words meaning “number” and “to count.” A numeral is the symbol that represents a number. Numerous means “many,” and innumerable means “countless.” Numerical superiority is superiority in numbers, and your numerical standing in a class is a ranking expressed as a number.::
::	numerology alphanumeric enumerate supernumerary

KILO is the French version of the Greek word chilioi, meaning “thousand.” France is also where the metric system originated, in the years following the French Revolution. So in English, kilo- shows up chiefly in metric-system units. Before the computer age, the most familiar kilo- words for English-speakers were probably kilowatt, meaning “1,000 watts,” and kilowatt-hour, meaning the amount of energy equal to one kilowatt over the course of an hour.::
::	kilobyte kilometer kilohertz kilogram

MICRO, from the Greek mikros, meaning “small,” is a popular English prefix. A microscope lets the eye see microscopic objects, and libraries store the pages of old newspapers on microfilm at 1/400th of their original size. And we continue to attach micro- to lots of familiar words; most of us could figure out the meaning of microbus and microquake without ever having heard them before. Scientists often use micro- to mean “millionth”; thus, a microsecond is a millionth of a second, and a micrometer is a millionth of a meter.::
::	microbe microbiologist microbrew microclimate

MULTI comes from the Latin word multus, meaning “many.” Thus, a multicultural society is one that includes people of several different countries, languages, and religions; a multimedia artwork uses two or more artistic media (dance, music, film, spoken text, etc.); and a multitude of complaints reaching your office would be a great many indeed.::
::	multicellular multidisciplinary multifarious multilateral

PAR, from the Latin, means “equal.” Our English word par means an amount taken as an average or a standard, and especially the standard score for each hole on a golf course—which is why the phrase “par for the course” means “about as well as expected.” We compare things to see if they're equal; similar things can be called comparable—that is, “equal with.” And “on a par with” means “comparable to.”::
::	parity disparity nonpareil subpar

PHOB comes from the Greek noun phobos, “fear,” and it shows up clearly in our noun phobia, meaning “unusual fear of a specific thing.” Phobias vary greatly in seriousness and also in frequency. Most of us have experienced claustrophobia at some time, but few truly suffer from fear of the number 13, a condition known as triskaidekaphobia.::
::	acrophobic agoraphobia xenophobe arachnophobia

HEM/HEMO comes from the Greek word for “blood” and is found at the beginning of many medical terms. By dropping the h-, the same word produced the suffix -emia, which likewise shows up in lots of “blood” words, including anemia, leukemia and hyperglycemia.::
::	hemorrhage hematology hemophilia hemoglobin

ITIS, a suffix found in both Greek and Latin, means “disease” or “inflammation.” In appendicitis your appendix is swollen and painful, and in tonsillitis the same is true of your tonsils. With laryngitis, your throat and larynx may become so sore that it's difficult to talk. Some of us enjoy making up our own -itis words; high-school teachers, for example, long ago noticed that many of their seniors tended to lose all interest in schoolwork and start skipping classes, and labeled the condition senioritis.::
::	bursitis hepatitis bronchitis tendinitis

NANO SUPER DE NUL/NULL ARM SURG STRAT LATER TOM IATR::
::	

NANO comes from the Greek nanos, meaning “dwarf.” For a prefix meaning “small,” English got by for centuries with the Greek micro-, and later mini- came to be used widely as well. But only recently, as a result of advances in scientific knowledge and technology, has there been a need for a prefix meaning “extremely small”—a need that's been filled by nano-, which today is being attached to all kinds of words, sometimes not very seriously (nanoskirt, nano-brained, etc.).::
::	nanotechnology nanosecond nanostructure nanoparticle

SUPER, a Latin prefix meaning “over, higher, more than,” has become one of the most familiar prefixes in English, one of those prefixes that we use to create new words all the time: supermodel, superpowerful, superjock, supersize, supersweet—the list goes on and on. This all seems to have started in 1903 when the playwright G. B. Shaw translated the German word Übermensch, Nietzsche's famous term for the person who rises to heroic heights through discipline and creative power, in the title of his play Man and Superman. The comic-book character with the same name wouldn't make his appearance for another 30 years.::
::	superfluous insuperable supersede superlative

DE in Latin means “down, away.” So a descent is a downward slope or climb, and a decline is a downward slide (of health, income, etc.). To devalue something is to take value away from it. And you might describe a depressed friend as “down.”::
::	debase defamation degenerative dejection

NUL/NULL comes from the Latin word nullus, “none,” which is itself a combination of ne- (“not”) and ullus (“any”). Have you ever noticed how many of our negative words start with n-? Think of no, not, never, nothing, none, no one, nowhere, and the hundreds of non- words—just about all of which go back to the same Greek root.::
::	null nullity nullify annulment

ARM comes from the Latin arma, meaning “weapons, tools.” The root is seen in such English words as arms (i.e., weapons), armed, and army. It has nothing to do with the limb that starts at your shoulder; the name for that kind of arm comes from the Latin word meaning “shoulder.”::
::	armada armistice armory disarming

SURG comes from the Latin verb surgere, meaning “to rise, spring up.” Our noun surge means “a sudden, large increase,” and the verb surge means “to move with a surge.” A storm surge occurs when violent storm winds at sea cause the water to pile up higher than normal sea level. A surge protector keeps a spike in electrical current from “frying” your computer when a lightning strike sends a sudden surge down the wires.::
::	upsurge insurgency counterinsurgent resurgent

STRAT comes from the Latin word stratum, meaning “spread” or “bed.” Strata, a form of the same word, came to be used by the Romans to mean “paved road”—that is, street.::
::	stratum stratification substrate stratocumulus

LATER comes from the Latin adjective lateralis, meaning “side.” The noun for “side” in Latin was latus, and the same word served as an adjective meaning “wide.” The relationship between the two isn't hard to spot, since something wide extends far out to its sides. So lines of latitude extend east-west around the earth, in the dimension we tend to think of as its width (unlike lines of longitude, which extend north-south, in the dimension that, for some reason, we decided to think of as its “length”).::
::	lateral bilateral collateral equilateral

TOM comes from the Greek root meaning “cut.” Thus, the Latin word anatomia, from which we get anatomy, means “dissection”—that is cutting or separating the parts of an organism for detailed examination. In a lobotomy, the nerves linking a brain lobe to the rest of the brain are removed; even though lobotomies have hardly been performed in the last 50 years, the idea can still fill us with horror.::
::	appendectomy gastrectomy tonsillectomy mastectomy

IATR, from the Greek iatros, “healer, physician,” usually hides in the middle of words, where it isn't immediately noticed. A pediatrician treats children (see PED-). A psychiatrist is a physician who treats mental problems. (A psychologist, by contrast, doesn't have a medical degree and thus can't prescribe drugs.) And a physiatrist is a doctor who practices “physical medicine and rehabilitation,” which may involve such things as testing various physical abilities, relieving pain through electric heat or massage, or training patients to exercise or to use an artificial limb.::
::	iatrogenic bariatric geriatric podiatrist

MEDI OID SCOP TRANS PRO PRO RE RE- DERM ENDO::
::	

MEDI comes from the Latin medius, meaning “middle.” Our word medium refers to something in a middle position. The medieval period of European history, also known as the Middle Ages, is the period between Greek and Roman antiquity and the “modern age.” But why people around 1620 began to use the term “Middle Ages,” because they regarded themselves as modern, is an interesting question.::
::	median mediate intermediary mediocrity

OID comes from the Greek word for “appearance” or “form.” Since aster in ancient Greek meant “star,” the small bodies orbiting between Mars and Jupiter that looked like stars through primitive telescopes were called asteroids. A factoid is a little bit of information that looks like a fact, whether it is or not. And some people these days will attach -oid to just about anything; you can probably figure out the meaning of nutsoid, nerdoid, and freakazoid without much help.::
::	rhomboid deltoid dendroid humanoid

SCOP, which usually appears in a suffix, comes from the Greek skopein, meaning “to look at.” In English we have the simple noun scope, along with some other words it sometimes stands for: telescope, microscope, periscope, and so on. And have you ever used a stereoscope, a device your great-grandparents probably enjoyed, which lets you look through a viewer at two slightly different photographs of the same thing, one with each eye, to enjoy the illusion that you're seeing it in three dimensions?::
::	endoscope arthroscopic laparoscopy oscilloscope

TRANS comes from Latin to indicate movement “through, across, or beyond” something. Translation carries a writer's meaning from one language to another. A television signal is sent or transmitted through the air (or a cable) to your set. When making your way through a city on public transportation, you may have to transfer from one bus or subway to another.::
::	transient transfiguration transponder transcendent

PRO is an important prefix, with a couple of quite different broad meanings. In this section, we'll look at words in which pro- has the basic meaning “for” or “favoring.” Everyone knows words like pro-democracy and pro-American, but other pro- words may not be quite so self-explanatory.::
::	proactive pro proponent pro

PRO, in its other broad meaning, means “before, in front of.” So, for example, to proceed means “to move out in front”; to progress means to “to move forward”; and somebody prominent stands out, as if he or she were actually standing out in front of the crowd.::
::	protrude prophylaxis promulgate prologue

RE is a prefix which, like pro- (see PRO), has more than one meaning. In this section, we'll focus on the meaning “again.” We use re- words with this meaning every day—redo, reheat, recheck, reread, resell, repaint, etc.—and we feel free to make up new ones as needed. But in plenty of other re- words, the meaning isn't so obvious.::
::	remorse reiterate rejuvenate reconcile

RE-, in its other main sense, means “back” or backward.” Since doing something again means going back to it, the two senses are actually related; still, the meaning of re- in most words is pretty clearly one or the other. So a rebound comes back at you; to recall means to “call back” a memory; and to react is to “act back” at someone else's action.::
::	reciprocal rebut revoke regress

DERM comes from the Greek derma, meaning “skin.” For medical advice on a skin problem such as acne, we may go to a dermatologist, or skin specialist. When we get a shot, it's usually with a hypodermic, a needle that goes “under the skin” (see HYP/HYPO). A pachyderm is a “thick-skinned” animal, which most of us just call an elephant.::
::	dermal epidermis taxidermist dermatitis

ENDO comes from the Greek endon, meaning “within.” In English it appears almost always in scientific terms, especially in biology. A nonscientific endo- word is endogamy, meaning marriage within a specific group as required by custom or law—one of the many customs that can be seen everywhere from the most remote tribes to the highest society in wealthy countries.::
::	endocrine endodontic endogenous endorphin

NECRO PALEO CIRCU/CIRCUM MINI/MINU INTER SUR CO SYN Words from Mythology and History::
::	

NECRO comes from the Greek nekros, meaning “dead body,” so it's not surprising that it shows up in some unappetizing places. A necrophagous insect, for instance, is one that feeds on dead bodies; when homicide investigators discover a corpse, they may use the insect evidence to figure out when the person died.::
::	necrosis necromancer necropolis necropsy

PALEO comes from the Greek palaios, meaning “ancient”—that is, “older than old.” The prefix sometimes gets attached to very recognizable words; paleobiology, for instance, deals with the biology of fossil organisms, paleogeography is the study of geography in earlier geological eras, and paleoecology is the study of the relationship of plants and animals to their environment in those eras.::
::	paleography paleontology

CIRCU/CIRCUM comes from the Latin circus, meaning “circle.” So a circus is traditionally held under a round tent. A circuit can be a tour around an area or territory, or the complete path of an electric current. To circumnavigate means “to navigate around”—often around the world.::
::	circuitous circumference circumspect circumvent

MINI/MINU come from Latin words meaning “small” and “least.” So the minimum is the least, and a minute amount is almost nothing. And mini- is all too familiar as a prefix that we've been applying to all kinds of things since the 1950s: minivan, miniskirt, mini-mart, minipark, and the rest.::
::	minimalism minuscule minutiae diminutive

INTER comes straight from Latin. In English it has various meanings; all of them can be expressed broadly as “between,” but they're still quite distinct: “moving between” (intercity), “communicating between” (intercom), “coming between” (intercept), and so on. No wonder so many English words begin with inter-.::
::	intercede interstice interdict interpolate

SUR is actually a shortening of the Latin prefix super-, meaning “over, above” (see SUPER), and has the same meaning. A surface is the face above or on the outside of something. A surplus is something above and beyond what is needed. And to survey a landscape is to look out over it.::
::	surmount surcharge surfeit surreal

CO is a Latin prefix that generally means “with, together,” and we see it daily in such words as costar, cofounder, co-owner, and coworker. But many other co- words aren't quite so easy to understand when you first encounter them.::
::	coalesce cogeneration codependency cohesion

SYN is a Greek and Latin prefix meaning “together” or “at the same time.” So “in sync” (short for “in synchronization”) means “together in time.” And a synonym is a word that can be considered together with another word since it has the same meaning.::
::	syntax synthesize synergy syndrome amazon chimera cornucopia epicure exodus gorgon

TOXI TEN/TENU TECHNI/TECHNO LONG IDIO AER/AERO CAD TRIB Words from Mythology and History::
::	

TOXI comes from the Greek and Latin words for “poison,” something the Greeks and Romans knew a good deal about. Socrates died by taking a solution of poison hemlock, a flowering plant much like wild carrot that now also grows in the U.S. Rome's enemy Mithridates, king of Pontus, was obsessed with poisons, experimented with them on prisoners, and tried to make himself immune to them by eating tiny amounts of them daily. Nero's mother Agrippina poisoned several of her son's rivals to power—and probably did the same to her own husband, the emperor Claudius.::
::	toxin toxicity toxicology neurotoxin

TEN/TENU comes from the Latin tenuis, meaning “thin.” So to extend something is to stretch it, and lots of things get thin when they're stretched. The ten- root is even seen in pretend, which once meant to stretch something out above or in front; that something came to be a claim that you were something that you actually weren't.::
::	tenuous attenuated extenuating distended

TECHNI/TECHNO comes from the Greek techne, meaning “art, craft, skill,” and shows up in dozens of English words. Some, such as technical, technology, and technique, have long been familiar. Others, such as techno-thriller, were only coined in the current computer age, which has also seen the new cut-down terms techno (for techno-pop, the electronic dance music) and tech (for technician or technology).::
::	technocrat technophobe technophile pyrotechnic

LONG comes from Latin longus, which, as you might guess, means “long.” The English word long shows up in many compound terms such as long-suffering (“patiently enduring lasting offense or hardship”) and long-winded (“boringly long in speaking or writing”), but the long- root also sometimes shows up less obviously. To prolong something is to lengthen it, for example, and a chaise longue (not lounge!) is “a long reclining chair.”::
::	longitude elongate longueur oblong

IDIO comes from the Greek idios, meaning “one's own” or “private.” In Latin this root led to the word idiota, meaning “ignorant person”—that is, a person who doesn't take in knowledge from outside himself. And that led to a familiar English word that gets used too often, usually to describe people who aren't ignorant at all.::
::	idiom idiomatic idiosyncrasy idiopathic

AER/AERO comes from the Greek word for “air.” The aerospace industry manufactures vehicles that travel through the atmosphere and beyond into space. Aerodynamic designs move through the air with maximum speed. And aerophobia is the technical name for what we usually just call fear of flying.::
::	aerial aerate aerobic anaerobic

CAD comes from the Latin verb cadere, “to fall.” Thus, a cascade is usually a waterfall, but sometimes a flood of something else that seems to pour on top of you: a cascade of new problems, a cascade of honors, and so on.::
::	cadaver decadent cadence cadenza

TRIB comes from the Latin tribuere, meaning “to give” or “to pay.” So a group that distributes food passes it out to those in need, and when you contribute to the group you give your money or energy to it.::
::	tribute tributary attribute retribution halcyon meander oedipal ostracize paean philippic satyr zealot

C1.D 2.S 3.D 4.D 5.S 6.S 7.S 8.S 9.S 10.S::
